---
layout: post
title: How much process is too much process?!
date: '2016-11-10T02:36:23+05:30'
tags:
- process
- it
- it process
- information industry
tumblr_url: http://snortingcode.tumblr.com/post/152987400160/how-much-process-is-too-much-process
draft: false
path: /posts/how-much-process-is-too-much-process
category: ramblings
description:
---
It is easy to get delusional about the value that processes defined in a project add to it. There are just 3 types of people in a project - ones that swear by process, ones that hate all aspects of it and ones that follow without ever questioning anything about it. Here’s my 2 cents on what goes wrong and how to stop it from going wrong.Managers as process cops:I’ve seen so many managers beating down process down every developer’s throat without giving it any thought! Just like a typical cop who cares less about the legitimacy of a law and worries only about its enforcement, quite a few managers do not adapt a process for their team/project, they try to bend the team and the project to fit a process! I cannot tell you how terrible this could be within the limits of a humble blog post! Here, let me say it out loud: Don’t be sheep! Think of areas where following a particular process is harming your project and/or team members and change the things that are being done accordingly. Each time you fail to do this your teams productivity would suffer. Sometimes, it would be impossible to capture this loss of productivity by the metrics that you are looking at since the process does not allow you to go beyond those data points - it’s like being trapped in a matrix!Is your process eating into developer time?A classic example is a lead engineer spending 1 hour everyday on putting a report together that could be easily avoided if all the stakeholders agreed on one tool and are ready to look at the report that the tool generates instead of expecting an excel sheet embedded in an email!This happens so often, different stakeholders would require different metrics and reports and would be very rigid in the presentation of these metrics. The rule should be simple: if a particular report has to be generated on a regular basis, automate the report generation or capture it in a dashboard that they have access to. Excel sheets are a great tool as well but, manually entering data points into a sheet after pulling it from a tool is the most awful waste of resources!Prefer Hygiene over Process!A better way to get people to do the expected thing is to make it part of the hygiene that’s baked into the culture of your team. Following a clean process should be as intuitive as writing proper comments in the code base. How you ‘enforce’ it is completely dependent on how the team dynamics work! I would say that you should not try and enforce it after all. Demonstrate why a process point is a good idea and increases individual productivity and team performance and people would adopt it. For instance, documenting the ticket tracker with essential information about the task one is working on can cut down on multiple mails flowing around and scattered information. Explore process automationIf you sincerely look for automation opportunities within your processes you’d be surprised how a small one time effort can free a lot of time and get rid of process compliance issues! Be open to feedbackPeople who are responsible for defining processes and other process owners need to be open to constructive feedback (make them read articles like these!)If one is too busy to listen to people one is working with/for one might as well not work with them! Having said that, I would love to hear from you :)
