---
layout: post
title: Web n.what?
date: '2014-11-12T13:56:01+05:30'
tags:
- web 2.0
- iot
- web 3.0
tumblr_url: http://snortingcode.tumblr.com/post/102463595325/web-nwhat
---
A colleague at work asked me today, “Tell me what ‘Web2.0’ is”. It almost seemed like a historical question but, I ended up giving him the wrong answer! I remember “selling” 2.0 to a client a few years ago during a sales pitch however, things have changed tremendously in these few years.
I thought it is best that I write a short note to myself about the comparisons between 1.0, 2.0 and (what was initially touted as) 3.0 -versions- of the Web. Could be an interesting note to come back to, say, 5 years from now :)
Web 1.0 - The era of wide eyed audience!This was the static web age. HTML pages, poorly scattered all over the www. Schools felicitating their ''wiz-kids’ for hosting their High School’s info page on the Internet that was built using HTML and JPEG images. The bigger players were busy ''digitalising’ their content to make it available to the people over the Internet, the search engines were ingesting all of this static content and indexing, serving search results. Internet was all about discovery! The most dynamic nature of a typical website was a contact form that sent an email to the admin of the website!
Web 2.0 - The arrival of human beings.As good as the Internet was, being static was terrible! The community was there and it needed to connect more seamlessly. Web2.0 was already born before the term was coined! An age of interaction, user generated content, online social networking. The technology was nothing new but, the way it presented itself changed the way people connected, consumed and communicated over the www. The technology became a mere vehicle for content generation, a mechanism through with people could not only consume the web but also enrich it. Today a majority of content/data is user generated (or at least a result of user’s interaction with the web). The technology has expanded and become more reliable to handle this barrage of data!
Web 3.0 - The machines take over!Believe it or not, the machines have arrived! The technology today is more about several machines interacting with each other to improve the world around us. This is the age of APIs and IoT. According to a few estimates, in the next few years each human being in the world would be surrounded by >3000 connected devices. If you do the math, the number can easily send your mind into a spin. A refrigerator ordering groceries from your local e-market when it is low on ammo, a self-driving car stopping for re-fuelling at a gas station, the bed giving notification to your local launderette to pick up the sheets when the dirt level goes beyond a mark and, all these interacting with your bank to carry out the monetary transaction is not just the future - it is here!
