---
layout: post
title: Here's How The 'Hours of Work' Is a Flawed Idea In a Creative Environment.
date: '2015-03-10T02:54:55+05:30'
tags:
- remuneration
- it
- compensation
- work culture
- 9to5
tumblr_url: http://snortingcode.tumblr.com/post/113238263555/heres-how-the-hours-of-work-is-a-flawed-idea-in
---
For the longest time, work (and hence remuneration for that work) has been measured in the time spent in doing a certain work. The hourly rate itself would depend on how much value that type of work carries, the level of skill of the doer, the scarcity of the type of labor (and sometimes, how strong a personal bond exists between the doer of work and the person responsible for remuneration).To understand how this came to being and to be able to evaluate if this is the right way to go about things, it is important that we visit the history behind the practice first.When human beings were hunters and gatherers, the average work week was less than 10 hours! Very erratic in nature and quite versatile, it was not something that could lead to or support a thriving economy and development. The age of industrialization saw standardization of working hours (and a drastic increase in them). The machinery was in place, the more hours it ran, the more the production and with artificial lighting available to light the dark side of the 24 hour day, there was no reason why it should not! There were visionaries like Henry Ford who advocated a much shorter work week postulating that it was not just better for the employee and inline with employee welfare but, better for the economy in general because shorter week gave the workers time to consume without which production was useless.So, that was the general idea which remains more or less the same today. The average working hours have reduced drastically over the past 60 years with few countries clocking as low as 21 hours a week of work (Netherlands duh! but, countries like France are not far behind) yet incentives like 150% remuneration for ‘overtime’ get people to work more (at least in countries with less power distance index where justification is required from the superiors for working extra and is not taboo to question a late night stay at work, etc.). This is due to several reasons which we shall not go into here.The point to note in all of this is that this is an idea borrowed and extended from the industrial realm - a place where labor is just that, labor! The machines are put in place and the presence of humans on the assembly line is quite mechanical in itself. ''Skill’ is a mere exposure to the work environment directly proportional to the time one spends on the machine. Not far away from say the modern day IT service industries in the third world.However, there is a stark difference between the two - the mechanized industry labor and IT industry labor. The IT industry produce is not limited by the rate at which a particular assembly line operates. It is indeed possible that the produce from an IT industry can be quantified in more than just hours of work! Every piece of work can have an associated value to it that results in the success of the company or the client and that’s how the worth of an employee should be measured - the value of the deliverable produced by the employee.Benefits of the approachA motivated employee with more skills would get more done in the regular working hours and her remuneration linked to that quantifiable work would eliminate the need for lousy bell-curves and associated employee frustration.With a larger variable component in the compensation the employers would pay only for what work gets done above a basic minimum payout.This promotes a healthy accountability for work and encourages ownership. When adopted within an open environment it can work wonders!Would drive employees to be more efficient in their work. Drive them to automating tasks, getting work done in smarter ways, cutting down on time to develop a module because (surprise!) the time is not a factor in compensation!Implementation Implementation, as in any other case of adopting new approach, can be challenging. The anchor point of the implementation could be the estimation that going into every project. A regular estimation document talks about effort required for a job - measured in units of time. Use the same document to translate this ''effort’ to the work-hours calculation that your establishment uses.A more efficient employee is then free to utilize the ''extra’ time in ways she deems fit - personal development (for example learning a new technology that would benefit the employers eventually), taking care of her personal affairs, etc. resulting in a happier, more satisfied employment experience.(I would love to hear from people with more valuable experience and better ideas)
