---
layout: post
title: Leadership Goals
date: '2016-12-27T08:21:11+05:30'
tags:
- leadership
- corporate
- team
- worklife
- leader
tumblr_url: http://snortingcode.tumblr.com/post/155021984115/leadership-goals
---
Let’s talk a little about leadership. Everyone hopes for a good 
leader to guide them in their formative years and aspires to be a worthy
 one themselves when the time is right. There could be several 
definitions of ‘worthy’ - be in a position to be able to provide help to
 people around, assume a position of unquestionable power, be immortal in some sense of the world - so we will skip talking about it.I
 have a few of my own ideas on this subject - most of them validated by 
my personal experiences, some validated by a strong conviction to agree 
with my own thought process that suggests that these HAVE TO BE TRUE (if
 my cognitive bias is blurring my thoughts please do write to me).This is what I think a good leader should try to do:Provide vision and general direction and then let the team take an organic path depending on the team dynamics.
 The initial few interactions are a time for everyone in the team to 
understand the others and form the initial set of expectations from one 
another. Even in a group where everyone knows everyone else, embarking 
upon a new project can always expose new areas of interests and 
conflicts. It is important for the team to cope with diversity of 
thoughts, ideas and people and a good leader enunciates the benefits of 
this ‘self-discovery’ of the team dynamics by each of the team members. A team that shares a pizza is bound to have lesser communication barriers when they work together.Define policies and processes based on the dynamics that surface due to the interaction between team members.
 Instead of forcing a structure of rules and processes on the team, try 
to learn from the way the team interactions take shape and don’t shy 
away from making drastic changes to processes that have in fact worked 
for you in the past. Think of your team as a graph with each node 
attached to every other node through a unique relationship - for a team 
of 10 people that would be (10*9)/2 = 45. Each of these relationships 
add an idiosyncrasy to the team composition and dynamics. Each team is 
different from every other team and what works for one would not work 
for the other in exactly the same way. Be ready to experiment with your 
ideas.Instrumented leadership to gather progress metrics, gauge general direction of the team while keeping away from micromanagement.
 A team is a living organism that provides very informative insights 
into its own functioning. Get into the habit of collecting valuable 
information about the team’s performance on areas that you feel are 
important. It could be simple metrics like how often has a sub-task 
shared by 2 or more people from the team been done as per your 
expectations and how often has it suffered because of the task 
assignment, composition of the team, etc. Measurement is important 
because everyone would have their unique way of handling a challenge, 
what works for one might not work for the other and a thorough 
examination and validation by means of statistical analysis can refine 
the task assignment process. You could capture, for example, the nature 
of task, members involved, task completion details, number of conflicts 
arising during the task (asking team members to submit a work-log entry 
with fields like “Was the day productive? (Yes/No/Partially)”, etc. can 
provide some initial sparks for the larger task of gathering team 
performance related metrics (more on this in a later post).Clear roadblocks and point out future blocks and bottlenecks based on experience and inspection of gathered team metrics.
 The metrics that you have been capturing would certainly provide some 
sense of direction - Are tasks getting closed as per expectations of 
timelines and quality? Do team members feel more enthusiastic to work 
with a certain set of employees than the others? What can be said about 
favored tasks and favored team members? - The more observant you are, 
the better the chances of finding the sweet spot of maximum efficiency. 
Remember that as a team leader your job is to ensure that people are 
happy in their engagement with you and the team. While nothing 
replaces a keen watch on the efforts that the team has been putting, 
never get into the habit of micro-management. Treat your teammates the 
way prison inmates are treated at your own risk. Think of this as an 
opportunity to find out more about the people you work with - be 
genuinely interested in their personal and professional growth. Make
 the team feel that they are responsible to a great extent not just for 
providing manpower and skill sets but even for the direction that the 
product takes over the course of time. Ownership is always an 
illusion in a professional setup. That being said, the best way to 
define ownership I believe is to have a person responsible for the 
setbacks and celebrations resulting from their actions and efforts. 
Since both “setback” and “celebration” are more or less just social 
constructs with the central idea that making incremental increase in the
 reputation one holds in the society would result in direct or indirect 
benefits one gets and increase the chances of a ‘better life’, these can play a very important part in promoting ownership of the project that the team is working on.Take
 measures to limit the fear of failure on an individual level. People 
are more creative when their heads are not always on the line. 
Creativity is difficult. A number of researches point out that a 
constant fear of failure can harm creative thinking in the long run. It 
might be a good idea to push for better results but, find ways for 
saying it in such a way that the team feels a need to succeed rather 
than a need to not fail. A lot of bad things happen when we fail and our
 mind is wired to focus on those more than the things that go relatively
 well. Assuring your team of a reasonable and unbiased assessment in 
case of failure and getting them excited about winning can make a big 
difference.Assume the position of accountability so that the rest of the team has lesser pressure to deal with.
 It is important that the team feels protected from outside pressures 
and has faith in your capabilities to rescue them when the tides are 
going against them. No one respects a leader who runs away from a 
battle.
