---
layout: post
title: Hacking My Biology
date: '2018-02-09T02:07:54+05:30'
tags:
- biohacking
- biohacker
- mindfullness
- health
- healthy
- lifestyle
tumblr_url: http://snortingcode.tumblr.com/post/170675753425/hacking-my-biology
---
Have you heard about bio-hacking? Depending on who you heard it from (and how much they love their alcohol), you might think that it is a story leaping out of a Black Mirror episode or that it is the best thing to ever come to your life/lifestyle.Let’s get done with the commonly perceived ideas first. The essentials of bio-hacking include things that you can do - invasive/non-invasive/supplements/drugs/lifestyle changes  - to make everlasting improvements to how you feel everyday (both mind and body). You would hear about Nootropics like Modafinil, MDMA, etc. You would also hear about crazy lasers looking into your scalp, funny looking eye-wear, thermal jackets that let you adjust the temperature of your body from an app so you can sleep better!Well, to be honest, those are the holy grail of bio-hacking. If you can pop 50mg of Modafinil everyday without it affecting your health (kidney, liver, etc.), you can get a lot more done in a regular day than most people around you. But, to get to those super-human mental abilities, you need to make some dramatic changes to your lifestyle so that your body is in a supreme state of health to be able to support a brain that’s working more efficiently than ever before! Implants, neural-link, and every crazy thing comes later. I like to think of bio-hacking as a mechanism to optimize every aspect of my life. Every part of my body needs to be working at an optimal level. Let me break it down:SleepI don’t need to convince you how important a good sleep is. But, let me use this topic to introduce compound interest to you. Just like the money on CI in a bank, every night of disturbed sleep feeds into a continuous cycle of doom! Each night you don’t sleep well, you add poison to your body. This CI principle applies to every aspect of bio-hacking. Every good thing you do to your mind/body adds up, every bad thing adds up as well! Here’s my strategy for sleep which is really something your grandmother would agree with - sleep for at least 8 hours a day, sleep everyday at the same time, don’t sleep on a full stomach. That is the simple part. Now, let’s add an OCD type finesse to it:I wear blue-light blocking glasses several hours before sleep (blue light reduces the production of melatonin in your body which is how your circadian rhythm regulates sleeping and waking hours.I take ice-cold water showers just before sleeping - your body temperature needs to be lowered to prepare you for sleep, I induce it artificially.I don’t eat anything after 19:00 hours. That gives me enough time to enter a ketosis state right when I go to bed - the brain needs the best quality nutrition during sleep.I also use ear-plugs several minutes before I hit the bed. I sleep wearing them (you’ll get used to it in 2-3 days!)I stop indulging in my phone/laptop at least a few hours before I sleep.At least an hour before I sleep, I switch off even the minutest of LEDs (that uber-cool sleep light of your MacBook that resembles your breathing rhythm could wake you up in the middle of the night without you knowing that you woke up!)I use an app, SleepCycle, that monitors my sleep. (It also measures my resting heart rate every morning!)I don’t drink coffee after 13:00. With my high metabolism, that’s the best I can do. Anything later than that would affect my sleep!Several bio-hackers take sleep inducing melatonin sprays, etc. to get a good night’s sleep.EatAnother obvious topic but, when you add the bio-hacking optimization zeal to it, it turns into a very powerful tool. Things you eat power your brain’s health. Eat healthy! But, with so many different cultures promoting their own “healthy diet”, it is difficult to zero in on just one. To be honest, that’s not true! We know what’s healthy and what’s not. Our body knows as well. If you feel bloated after a meal, you’ve either eaten too much or something that you should not have! I combine a (mostly) Keto diet with Intermittent Fasting (IF). Here are the things that I’ve been doing for several months/years. But, now I do them with zero cheat days:I fast. A lot. There are days when I eat just a single meal. There have been weeks in the past when I relied only on water! It started off as a personal challenge to gain control over my mind - “A person who can fast, think and meditate can do anything in life.” - Herman Hesse in Siddhartha (slightly modified to make it inclusive.) Here’s the great thing about IF, if you want to lose weight, you don’t need to eat something special, you just need to stop eating! Start small, there are several great resources to equip yourself with the knowledge you need to start IF so that you understand what’s happening to your body. I don’t consume processed sugar in any form! I’ve conditioned my brain in such a way now, that I feel disgusted when I see a piece of rich cake! Don’t eat right before you hit the bed - that’s the worst thing that you can do to your sleep! (This was mentioned in the sleep section as well. That’s not mindless repetition, it’s part of a theme that I’ll spell out for you towards the end! Hang on!)Eat natural. I get my proteins from animal sources (mostly) but, I cook a ton a vegetables at home. It is healthy to cook your own meal - therapeutic and you know what’s going into your body!I eat very limited amounts of processed food. A hearty burger with a thin slice of bread after 20 hours of fasting is my “cheat day”!I follow a 8/16 fasting regimen - eat for 8 hours, fast for 16! Out of those 16, I sleep 8 so, it’s not as difficult as it sounds. People do a “Warrior’s regimen” as well - 4/20. See what works best for you. The Intermittent Fasting is possibly the hardest to start with for most people. I say this because I’ve been trying to promote IF for the past several years when I discovered the joys of fasting and I don’t know anyone that I was able to convince yet! That said, if you plan well, it is very easy to do. Always remember, less than 10,000 years ago, we did not have farming, we went for hunting and at times returned with no food for the family! DrugsWe talked about poison entering your body! There’s nothing worse than alcohol and tobacco for you! I mean, yes, you’ll die faster if you gulped down some mercury but, seriously, we should all question our governments about the legality of these things! Alcohol - in any amount - kills! All those “health wine” “studies” are total crap. Alcohol is very bad for you, even in limited amounts!The same goes with tobacco. Tobacco is a toxin that the tobe-plant produces to protect itself from predators. It is supposed to be lethal for anyone with muscles and a relatively smaller body-mass! If we consumed it in large quantities, proportional to our body mass, we would die just like that poor caterpillar that attacks the plant. Nicotine does help you to relax your mind but, the net loss is just too big! When you smoke (anything!), you inhale some extremely poisonous gases, tar and a host of terrible things! I don’t have a drop of alcohol anymore!I hang out with people who are cool with that. Most reasonable, adults are!I don’t smoke! (The pollution in Bangalore is enough worry for me already - please suggest a good pollution mask?)When I go out with friends who smoke, I insist on sitting in the non-smoking area or something well ventilated. Sometimes I get lucky!ExerciseDo you see a theme here already? These are not things we didn’t know about. All regular stuff, done with a brutal honesty to yourself!Find the exercise that works best for you! Although, any exercise is potentially good, pumping iron alone would not give you a supreme health! It might give your body a super-human strength but, your mind and other important organs might suffer if you are not careful. I would recommend that you mix days of heavy and light workout. Here’s what I do:Yoga and Pilates everyday - I start my day with these and do them several times a day since it does not need a special arrangement or a lot of time (or a shower afterwards!). Just stretch when you like you’ve been sitting for too long! I use the EyeSaver App on my laptop to remind me of that. My FitBit helps as well.I’ve been trying to work on my hand-stand for the past year (I started because I saw some gorgeous pictures of my ex-boyfriend doing hand-stands in Borneo Island :P ). I’ve made considerable progress after I started Pilates for strength!I try to run every evening (having a friend to nudge you works really well here!). I do some 10-15 minutes of slow pace running followed by a very intense sprint to death. I’ve been able to bring my resting hearth rate to around 60 after I started preparing my hearth for some serious pumping action - the SMART Goal is to bring it between 55-60!Brutal HonestyThis one’s the most important thing in my opinion! Be brutally honest about yourself. Lying takes a lot of energy! Your brain has to work extra hard on things that are mostly not even important. In my experience, people lie because they want to create deception (an innately human quality) to their advantage!While honesty would not help you to win over the liars, a brutal honesty would be impossible to defeat! Try it out for yourself. Not having to lie in any situation requires practice but, once you start doing it, there’s no turning back and things become easy!Here are a few things people often lie about which I avoid at any cost:Sexual experiences, sexuality, sexual expressions. It happens to be a very important aspect of being human (more to follow in the next section). There’s no need to lie about sex, (almost) everyone does it! Duh!Simple things like - “How do I look?” - Don’t lie there, people will stop trusting you soon!Lying to escape authority - I think authority needs to be called out. I am as equal as anyone else on this planet, I don’t need your authority. I tell people when they are being authoritative. Some of them get pissed, some understand and I get improved versions of these individuals to hang out with.SexSex is important for a healthy adult. Human beings (just like other animals) start engaging in sexual experiences right after/during puberty. It is an activity that gives extreme pleasure which is (as of now, things hopefully, would change soon) not possible by any other means. If you’ve tried having dopamine, serotonin explosions in your head by other means, you would know what I mean. Things are not so simple with sex. Somehow, it is not just about the chemicals (although you can enhance the experience exponentially if your brain get artificial supplies of these chems!)With all its advantages, sex can be pretty harmful. Too less or too much of it can make you go insane! This is an area of your life that you need to optimize as best as possible because we have so less control over it. Here are some things that might help, although these things are ultra-personalized:Find steady sex partners who are comfortable with you. Saves a lot of Tinder time if you have a list of numbers on your phone already! I know who to call when!Human beings are serial monogamists. Follow that pattern and you’ll not have love-sex crisis in your life ever!When I have sex with a stranger/non-lover, I try to have a role-play scenario in my head. I pretend that we are lovers. Works wonders for me. I have a very vivid imagination :)Keep it safe! There are ways in which you can include safe sex in your sexual fantasy and make the safer versions work out better than the others!Don’t watch porn. Even if it works for you, it would cripple your imagination.Don’t worry too much about “love”. Yes, it’s better when done with love but, finding love, retaining it, keeping it healthy - all these are very harsh trade-offs. Keeping things simple has worked out much better for me in the last couple of years!Make breakfast/lunch/tea for your hook-ups. Both of you would feel great when doing it the next time!There are other things that can be done to enhance your sexual experience but, I won’t go into that due to legal reasons.MeditationIf there’s one thing you should do after reading this terribly long (but, hopefully useful) post, it should be to take time out to meditate everyday! If you ace this one thing, you can do several others with very less effort! There are several ways to reach that “flow” state. I started my journey a few years ago using some random focusing techniques. Then moved to the S N Goenka’s meditation method. I would highly recommend that! There are some neat meditation techs that the Neurosciences department of Stanford often talks about. Check them out as well. Essentially, having a control over your “reptilian brain” should become your life’s purpose! Conquer that and you have everything else within your reach!I meditate several times a day when I think my mind is going astray.Meditation just before bed/in-bed is pretty good.I’ve used the iOS App “Headspace” at times for some guided meditation. The narrator’s voice is seductive :)I’ve been able to direct my brain to reach orgasmic levels of detachment (le petite mort!) lately! (The first time that happened was when I was camping next to the Parvaty river in Kasol, Himachal Pradesh!)HydrationDrink up water! Several times a day! Water is a good source of Lithium as well, which is responsible for an optimal brain performance! Some important things to keep in mind about hydration:You body loses water with every breath. That means, your body would require hydration before you feel uncomfortable or dehydrated. Keep a water bottle next to you. Or set a timer!I drink hot water when I wake up, or before a shower, to heat my body from within. Cold water does the opposite so, I don’t drink any hot fluids before hitting the bed. Remember: Cold body => Prepare to sleep. Hot body => Get ready to work!Don’t substitute water with carbonated drinks, caffeinated drinks, artificially sweetened fluids.There are several great hydration strategies that I’m exploring myself. More on that soon.Social InteractionsLimit your regular social interactions to a small subset of meaningful ones! Very cautiously (and quite ruthlessly at times) remove all negative people from your life. There would be a few that you can’t do much about, try to change them or limit that interaction.Some people are nasty because they need help! If you are not in a position to provide that help, stay away! Don’t jump into a well of negative thoughts because of these people who are doomed!Social media is the worst thing to have happened to us! It has become that necessary demon that one cannot stay too far away from. Use very good judgement on every minute you spend on social media (as with people having a negative impact on your life!)I don’t have Facebook on my phone.My activity in most social media is on need based - I post but, don’t consume too much. I don’t have notifications turned on for most apps on my phone.I’m brutally honest with people around me. If they don’t like honestly, they distance themselves from me - saves me the effort to come up with a confrontational encounter.Speaking of which, I confront people in my lives. A lesson an old friend taught me. Sometime, you just have to tell people what you feel for them to understand you better. Don’t work on assumptions!Identify people who are beyond repair. Leave them!Try to improve your Social Intelligence every day. I try to have conversations with strangers I meet on the streets, in the bus, when I go shopping, etc. Smile at people you don’t know! Anxiety needs work, it won’t go away auto-magically!I use Apps like WoeBot (developed by Professor Andrew Ng’s team) that help you interact with the world outside in a much better way by teaching you terminology to talk about your own behavior and mood! Engage with people you meet. Don’t just meet them. (You would be forced to do this if you meet them with no alcohol on the table or cigarette in your hands! Work at it!)I have spent several weeks learning about human behavior from one of the finest people alive - Dr. Robert Sapolsky! His video lecture series (MIT OCW) is available online - It would change your life!I also, try to understand what the other person is going through so that my words/actions have the effect I want them to have on my interactions with them. It needs practice, I’m practicing! Brutal honesty can help here!Traditions vs Scientific MethodThis is the last topic but, I think it is the most important! There is real wealth in traditional techniques like Fasting, Meditation, etc. But, that’s where you should stop. Adopting a scientific method to evaluate all aspects of your life would help you make rational choices in life. If you prefer to go by what your “gut says”, do that by all means but, also try to understand what gives rise to that gut feeling. There are very valid scientific approaches to living that are being investigated everyday. New evidences are coming to light each hour. Some of it is hopefully going to align with your belief system but, most of it would not! You need to be prepared to let the cognitive dissonances in your life dissolve without much resistance.As a person coming from a religious family, making peace with my atheistic belief system was the hardest part - luckily, I did that when my Pre-Frontal Cortex was still under development. For a lot of us beyond 25 years of age, fighting these religious ideas, traditions, dogmas would be a great challenge. A good way to start would be to understand the origins of religion and religiosity. Dr. Sapolsky can come to the rescue here as well. With that in mind, let’s talk about the final topic and probably the most important!Stress - One Ring to Rule Them AllIf you do everything right, follow things to the last detail, be brutally honest about your lifestyle, you could still see yourself going down a spiral of death if you don’t manage stress in your life! Those Glucocordicoids are a friend but, only in limited and well controlled quantities!One of my previous managers had the belief that “people work better under fear”. Although it sounds stupid, a lot of people work like that. So much so that, we often prefer leaders who treat us like shit! There’s a good read on Creativity and stress by the Harvard Business Review that you might want to check out as well.Here’s a remarkable lecture on stress and depression: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NOAgplgTxfcIf you watch one thing today, watch this! Do this stress business right and everything will fall in place, get this part wrong and everything spirals back into disaster!Now you know why carefully eliminating stressful people in your life is so important! It’s the people around us that give us stress. If your code does not compile, the machine is not going to complain, your boss would! Final WordsEach of the bio-hacks I talked about work only if done together. You neglect one and everything else will crumble down. Have a great diet, exercise routine, healthy interactions and drink a glass of wine and, you’ve ruined everything! You might not see the changes because they are very subtle - but hey, we’ve all had that morning after that binge drinking, when we woke up with a swollen face and a demolished spirit! Don’t do that to yourself!I hope the term “bio-hacking” seems a lot less of a “hack” to you now. There are absolutely no downsides, only massive gains that work like compound interest and make each day better!Well, there is one downside, I guess. You’ll have so much energy and focus throughout the day that you’ll spend like, 2 hours writing about it in your blog just because a friend asked you for “a link that would tell me more, most of the things I’m reading online are freaking me out!” So yeah, have fun hacking your biology! Like always, please reach out with comments and suggestions.
