---
layout: post
title: Competition, Insecurity and Scientific Method
date: '2018-03-03T01:56:17+05:30'
tags:
- competition
- insecurity
- anxiety
- mental health
- relationships
tumblr_url: http://snortingcode.tumblr.com/post/171475273565/competition-insecurity-and-scientific-method
---
I’ve noticed a pattern lately. At the risk of over-fitting, let me share what I think, so I can learn from your experiences as well.Competition has been showcased as the cornerstone of human progress. “We are getting better every day because we compete with each other”, has become the golden mantra that guides policy making, relationships at work, even family ties at times! I don’t want to go into how this idea has been used to justify unfair business practices, justify neoliberal economic policies (with a completely circular argument!), ignore the privileges that govern so much of our lives and ultimately gives rise to a false notion of “free will”!I wish to talk about something more insidious. Possibly, even try and make sense of why the world seems broken, why relationships seem fake and why it is so difficult to find true love!

>I believe that competition is a facade. The real evil is a deep sense of insecurity that goes unnoticed.

Hiding behind this facade are all sorts of unsorted issues that, over the years, shape into a complex entangled mess of falsehoods which can be impossible to get rid of without a focused effort.Let’s start with some personality traits. A typical insecure person described by your psychology textbook would be someone with a “lack of confidence”, “lack of protection” which is what it most certainly is. However, people have deception as a survival skill. We won that fight with the gang of wolves because we could convince them that we were stronger! We practice deception from an early age. The way animals engage in a “fight-play” routine, we hone our deception skills. Over the years, we get really good at it. We acquire such excellent deception skills that we are able to deceive ourselves! Insecurity is often not dealt with inspection/introspection, it is given a lethal dose of deception. Such insecure people exhibit high confidence, a fake sense of superiority and an attitude that gives them “that edge” that’s so palpable in company boardrooms. They are the ones that “get things done” (but, they never do these things! They don’t know how to!)

Such insecure people who have learned to deceive themselves come with a myriads of unhealthy traits. This fake sense of superiority’s first victim is the willingness to try out new things. Kids don’t care what they look like, how rich or poor they are, how tall they are, the color of their skin - and they know how to participate even when they are sure to fail. That’s how all of us took our first steps! We failed again and again (with a lot of people watching!) We are talking about people who don’t try new things because they might fail. They would demean, insult and try self-deception to get out of knowing about something new because that’s easier than facing failure.There’s a thing about science - it doesn’t care about our societal status! Science can tell even the most influential person that they are wrong. The people we are talking about then, do not have a scientific method. They might be scientists, scholars, doctors and engineers but, they are scared of science! These are people who are most gullible when it comes to “ancient wisdom”. These are people who would tell you that “science does not have all the answers” to justify a scientifically incorrect view that they hold close to heart. Since these are people who are all about authority, they find it difficult to defy authority. Deliver an authoritative judgement about an issue and they would take it to their graves. These are personality worshipers, they follow ideologies over methods. For them science comes in 2 flavors - “my science” and “their science”. One is wrong and the other is right. These are people who have a “right way to drink alcohol”, “authentic recipes”, “correct grammar”, “the best workout”, “traditional is better” approach to life!Another classic identification is the victim game. Such people find victims for their wits, sarcasm, wisdom and knowledge (Think about it! Victim of knowledge!). They thrive in groups that they can control and they always have a victim who is miserable. When the tables turn, things become ugly! The are always on the lookout for issues with others around them and they try their best to expose them. While they try their best to hide their own insecurities, they use all their social intellect to identify others’ insecurities and use them against their victims. They are usually very good at the insecurities game because they swim in it more often than others. A good way to know this is to compare their behavior in a group versus when they are alone with you (alone is generally a lot nicer and very likeable).Such people often have very magnetic personalities. Abusive relationships have this character as well. It often becomes impossible to leave the tormentor because they are so good to you at times! So good that you love them! When these people are not around, we terribly miss them. Remember, they are very good at reading insecurities!These people are easy to spot online as well - #onlyWayToLive #beLikeMe #alwaysTheBest and sometimes, #worstPlaceOnEarth #cantHearThisCrappyMusic #whyAreAllPeopleSoStupid (notice the “all or nothing” feeling there? You should read more about it!)Well, that said, what’s the solution? Should there be a large scale LSD-in-water-supply project to repair the world? I can offer my insights about my own battle with insecurities, anxiety and depression. The solution depends on which side of the facade you are (I’ve been on both and its not fun at all!).

Let’s start with when you are a victim.
>Victim cheat code
* Be aware of yourself
* Look for signs like limited social interaction, limited participation in social activities
* Follow the scientific method religiously (see, what I did there :D )
* Don’t take yourself too seriously (check out Dudeism!)
* If you feel things are going out of hand, avoid or confront the people in your life who you think might need help in dealing with their insecurities and anxiety (let experts handle it though).A good question to ask is - “Can I be completely honest around this person?” If the answer is “No”, there’s a problem that needs to be addressed.

Things are a lot more complicated when the facade has caged you inside a growing mass of insecurities.
>Beat your insecurities
* Be honest! Avoid even white lies (no they are not required to live in the world!)
* Be sincere in your judgement of yourself. Be open about failure, about being wrong.
* Turn that competition inward. Compete with your own self and start by attempting to fail without feeling miserable about it.
* Talk about mental health with your friends and family. Depression and anxiety affects us all on some level.
* Putting yourself in others’ shoes is a great technique to still “get things done” while being nice to others. Try it as often as you can.
* Talk about your insecurities (even the most private ones!) Talking about things engages your prefrontal cortex (the region of your brain that makes you human) and eases the fears and anxiety that your amygdala (the reptilian brain) is constructing.
* Try to be more mindful. Meditation is great (try to learn it the right way and avoid mixing it with religion/spirituality - see the next point)
* Try to be more flexible and open to new ideas and changes in life. “Ancient wisdom” belongs in the ancient times.
