---
layout: post
title: When is a Company Not a Startup Anymore?
date: '2016-05-17T15:41:15+05:30'
tags:
- startup
- company
- organization
tumblr_url: http://snortingcode.tumblr.com/post/144515883530/when-is-a-company-not-a-startup-anymore
draft: true
path: /posts/when-is-a-company-not-a-startup-any-more
category:
description:
---


A journalist friend of mine asked me a question today - “This company is 5 years old! Is it still a startup?” The short answer was “Yes” in that particular case but, he wanted an explanation so here it is.
Before giving you my version of the truth, let me tell you why my observations are not completely baseless. My technical journey largely started in a startup (they were starting their product division in Bangalore and I was one of their first employees), after a couple of years in that company I took an year off regular employment to work on my own idea which failed without reaching the MVP stage. After that I joined a company that had a relatively small footprint in India and the Bangalore office worked a lot like a startup in certain areas. I’ve helped few friends with their business and some of them are hoping to make it big in future :)
There are several aspects of an organisation that differentiates it from an ‘arrangement’ trying to be one - culture, process, revenue, volatility of ideas, renumeration, rigidity to change ,number of employees - and all these being invariants for the set of select few running the company at a particular time. CultureEvery setup, all arrangements, every single gathering of people has a culture definitive of it. The things that motivate these groups of people collectively, their collective taste, collective behaviour, all define the culture of these people. The work environment in which the company thrives, what keeps the employees and their employers happy at the same time! And with so many Tech companies making it big and retaining their culture intact, it would be wrong to use the phrase “startup culture”. If a Google has a friendly pet policy, it does not make it a startup. Nor does bringing a pet to your work makes it a startup culture. It just means that your workplace has a friendly pet policy - nothing more, nothing less. I know companies that allow one to bring pets to work but their work spaces are designed in such a corporate setting that no one has ever got their pets to work! Startup culture is all about a democratic setup. There are bosses and employees but, a good idea is never rejected, a suggestion is always given an audience. And bad ideas are pointed out because the CEO is not someone who has membership with all the golf courses in the country! This openness of a democratic nature is almost impossible to have in a “non-startup” company. The Power Distance is so high that while the company may promote common forums where people could talk about things freely, an employee would always be hesitant in criticising the management openly. And if you are a startup that functions without democracy it might be time to evaluate your ‘startup culture'' ProcessA complete lack of process or the absence of a consistent process can only be present in a startup like environment. Any organisation that has entered a stable state would have had ample opportunities to learn from their past to provide the basis for strong process practices.  
These processes could be around human resource management, technology, employee utilisation. A startup, for instance, would never know what to do with a rogue employee who abuses the flexible work from home policy but, is brilliant at what they do. All such matters would eat into the precious time of the leadership! All that a process really does is provide an unambiguous answer to a situation. This answer takes into account legal aspects, has ways to measure impact and is proven to be the right way forward in the given situation. Process is an organisation’s memory of events. A lot of standard policies are formed by the collective wisdom of all the business owners of the past and present and are therefore solid gold! A startup that boasts of a lack of policies is just that - a startup. Give them time, they would either perish or have certain policies set in stone. RevenueThis is the toughest of all. Is a creative firm, owned and run by 2 friends, running successfully for several years a startup? What if they have not added a single more employee in the past 10 years? I would love to hear your thoughts on this. Ideas running the companyFor a lot of startups, the idea IS the company! So what happens when this idea changes fundamentally along the way? The company either disintegrates or evolves into something new. I’m not talking about a giant company diversifying to capture new markets or to save itself in the face of competition. I’m talking about a company working on an idea that has no takers yet and unearthing a fundamental flaw in the idea. An idea certainly goes though an iteration in a startup before it reaches a stable foundation. This is why having a vision for the company becomes so important. When a change in the idea defining the company is required, the vision gives it direction. RigidityA startup is anything but rigid. The cost of change is so less that it is stupid to not adapt and align towards a better approach. I’ve seen people redesign the entire product even with several paying customers onboard in startups. I’ve also seen big organisations losing contracts because of moving sluggishly against swift competition. For example, I’ve always promoted a well defined and quick ‘firing’ policy in a company. A startup can fire a non-performer in a day, the same takes weeks and sometimes months in a larger organisation. If something works in most cases, a bigger company never tweaks it readily.  
Number of employeesInstead of looking at the number of employees, one should try to look at the business model of the company and see if the number of employees and the growth in these numbers is justified by the type of business. For a startup that provides services, a double digit grown in the number of employees is the only measure of success while a product based startup might spend years with only a small set of people but growing their business exponentially.  
The important thing is that in a startup, each employee is very valuable. If you know of startups where a few employees are expendable, you are looking at a startup that is doomed to fail. Replacing an employee can be detrimental to the survival of the startup while at the other hand it is not uncommon to hear about CEOs of big organisations being replaced. GrowthThis is probably the best indicator of a company being a startup. Startup has to mean big growth! And the growth of the employees should be a part of the growth of the company. If you join a startup that is growing very rapidly but, there is no growth for you in your role, it is not a startup for you! Always look for crazy growth options if you are going to be a part of a startup team. 
